ladies and gentlemen of the audience
ladies and gentlemen of the jury i might
say i made a
broadcast just a few days ago talking
about multiculturalism
and it occurred to me now to make
another following up on some of the
unresolved points questions and
contentions
now um i
i love the livestream format i love the
spontaneity it brings
to what would otherwise be incredibly
dry and difficult topics of
contention such as this one it's an
imperfect medium
and there are stakes i would say that
i'm open to the possibility that this
particular live stream will end up being
shared only
to patreon subscribers or only to people
who are interested in hearing it
now i'm saying that you may imagine that
i've haven't have had an avalanche
of uh criticisms or questions or even
hate mail in response to my earlier
video that's not the case at all
uh it's interesting what my audience is
shocked by
what my audience chooses to take the
time and spend the effort to
disagree with me about and what they do
not so
i've had innumerable emails sent to me
in the past about
video games and quitting video games
i've had innumerable emails
sent to me about the ethics of pet
ownership
and of uh how to treat wild animals and
what to do about rat infestations
so there sometimes quite particular uh
ethical problems of this kind sometimes
involving people's direct lives
i do get a lot of a lot of people i've
also had
a lot of email and frankly hate mail
about some
completely abstract philosophical
questions that couldn't possibly change
anyone's life
but where people's own ego people's own
sense of intellectual superiority over
others is attached
to those abstract ideas now
perhaps i'm speculating wildly here
perhaps people in the audience will
write in it and let me know how
wrong i am but i would say that this
particular
issue um really just
astonishes people it really is just that
people in response to my position on
multiculturalism
don't know what to say don't know what
question to ask don't know what
objection
to offer and they find themselves
questioning
very very fundamental presuppositions of
their own
political perspective now sometimes our
prejudices are revealed
through the word associations in our
language if i
say to you cultural what's the next word
in the sentence cultural heritage
cultural tradition
cultural preservation right
when we use words like culture and
cultural
there's a very deep-seated assumption
that our
role and our responsibility is to
unquestioningly
promote promulgate perpetuate preserve
this culture that our relationship to
culture is one of
preservation um we don't
even have linguistically the concept of
cultural
destruction cultural
renovation cultural recycling
right that culture might be something
you have to demolish
in order to replace it with something
better you know
now you know my way of talking about
these subjects is normally to first and
foremost uh put a human face
on the issue to give you a sense of um
what the cost and consequences of our
you know
political beliefs would be um
on a one-to-one human scale and i think
it's quite easy once you've established
that
understanding with the audience to then
scale up and talk about issues on the
level of
millions of people um the implications
over indeed
over millions of years may sound
ridiculous but we're not just dealing
with decades or centuries here
we're dealing with millions of people
and in millions of years
that's the scale on which culture you
know exists
and uh influences human life that's the
scale on which it makes
some things thinkable and some things
unthinkable you know
right now in a country like canada there
are some people
for whom it is completely unthinkable to
be married
and pregnant at the age of 16. and there
are some people
for whom anything other than being
married and pregnant at the age of 16
is unthinkable right and then what that
entails in terms of
career and education and everything else
for the life of that woman
and for the life of the children she's
raising is tremendously profound
how can we have two populations living
within one in the same country
participating
in the same democracy one one culture
based on let's let's specify a little
further let's say there's a culture
that's based on arranged marriage
that parents arrange when the child is
14 15 years old they arrange for them to
be married
at 16 and then at 16 the marriage
happens
which by the way all over the world i
think 16 is pretty much the legal age of
marriage
it's kind of amazing what a what a
vestige that is of an earlier time if
you look into it where you're living
it may be that with the parents
permission people can get married as
young as 14 and so on it's it's these
kind of medieval assumptions about
marriage you know still exist
now just just to put this in contrast
can you get a tattoo at the age of 14
can you get a tattoo at the age of 15 or
16.
most jurisdictions around the world the
answer is no you have to wait until
you're 18 or some other agent majority
to get a tattoo why
because getting a tattoo is a decision
that will affect you for the rest of
your life
the question of which university you're
going to go to and what subject you're
going to study
and whether or not you joined the army
these are also decisions that affect
your life the decision to get married or
to get pregnant and have children
this is also a decision that affects
everyone but you know conveniently we
pretend that these are quite different
from getting a tattoo we preserve this
kind of uh
you know the the private scope for the
individual to make these decisions
recklessly on their own behalf
or indeed for their parents to make
these decisions recklessly
on their path um we don't want to
question
the extent to which this might be much
more much more important
much more fateful a decision
than getting a tattoo much more faithful
even getting a tattoo on your face
at the age of 16 is the decision to get
married and have children with an age
and all the doors that closes for you
and then just the one door it leaves
open for yourself and then the extent to
which a young woman who makes that
decision
is very likely to justify her decision
by
inculcating the same cultural values
into her children by insisting on the
necessity
and moral superiority of this one path
alone
now just to be fair going to medical
school is miserable
becoming a medical doctor is miserable
going to law school
is miserable becoming a lawyer is
miserable and all my life i have seen
how parents
who made those sacrifices and those
commitments likewise try to inculcate
into their children
the superiority of the path of going to
medical school at the path of going to
law school
i admit this is something that is it's a
critique or an analysis
you know is not uh only the um the
religious fundamentalist among us who
are uh susceptible
um
on that human scale of one
person that you're meeting getting to
know face to face
you know isn't it a terrible thing
to dismiss this one person you may know
and say well it's fine for you
to be a member of this church to be a
member of this
religion it's time for you to devote
yourself
to these abstractions to these prayers
to this chanting
let's say it's very common thing it's
fine for you
to believe in these these fictional
fabulous
things it's fine for you to
drop out of school get married and raise
children in addition to never know
anything else to never have have any
other potential in your life
you know to never even have a period of
questioning and trying your limits
and finding out what you could do or or
might do and it's fine for you
why
because of your culture
this leads to a view that is very
similar to
racism but it could be called culturism
right yeah so again growing up in
downtown toronto
i knew orthodox jews i'm ethnically
jewish myself by the way in case you
hadn't guessed
i'm not a member of the religion i'm not
a religious jew i'm a
nihilistic atheist you who knows i knew
orthodox jews who were making these
kinds of decisions
on what basis oh because that's their
culture that's their tradition because
they're beholden to
preserving and perpetuating that
tradition and they didn't
feel that others were beholden to that
tradition no
judaism's unusually clear-cut that way
judaism is a religion with a very very
small role for converting
outsiders you know uh most other
religions instead are
are more interested in proving to the
whole world that their particular set of
beliefs are true and valid for all
mankind for
the world but within uh judaism for the
most part people are quite content
to just feel that their tradition is
superior for them
that they personally should live by
these ethical rules and
whether or not whether or not anyone
else does is immaterial because they're
they're outside of that tradition now
you know
okay i could tell quite a few quite a
few uh stories
of this kind i remember a young woman so
this is before i got married this is
before i met
melissa no this wasn't me wasn't me
cheating with anyone
i remember a young woman
who met me at a party and
the first hint that she was uh
orthodox jewish fanatic in this sense
was her style of dress and her hair and
the cues aren't that obvious by the way
i just
mentioned uh with women's dress anyway
in judaism
and i remember how she was talking
remember she was making eye contact with
me
and you know her whole manner of kind of
flirting with me or coming onto me had
shifted because
at first she was suspecting that i was
jewish just based on my face
and then when she knew for a fact she
was even more forward
you know um
you know this this young woman so we
were both in university i don't know
we're both 20 people 21 or 22 i i don't
know
but you know um
you know do you feel i mean when you
meet someone that's face to face you get
to know them even for just a few minutes
of conversation
do you feel that they should be sort of
cast aside
from the progress of history and devote
their lives
to the museum of the beliefs of their
ancestors
you know that they should spend their
time tending the fire
that was lit by their parents and
grandparents
and indeed justifying and making excuses
for
that tradition instead of frankly
demolishing that tradition disbelieving
that tradition being at least open to
you know adopting
and taking on new new perspectives so i
just mentioned uh we have 31 people in
the audience which is great it's a
totally unannounced unplanned live
stream
if you guys want to take a moment to hit
the thumbs up button it'll help more
people
discover the live stream enjoy the
conversation this is very unusual i
normally have a whole bunch of comments
uh rolling in i have no comments
visible at my end at the moment it could
be that you're all just flabbergasted by
what i had to say
but i wonder if it's just a technical
problem at uh
at google right now because i'm actually
not seeing any of your any of your
comments
pop up but i dare not interrupt or
restart the live stream
uh for this reason so anyway um
look sorry so i warned you at the
beginning of the video that i was going
to take some time just to put a human
face on it
and to to give it this this sense of the
sense of scale the sense of
immediacy you know now look continue
with the same example this this young
woman
um if i could tell you various things
about her it's just someone i met and
spoke to you once but still i
i remember it um
you know with anyone like this what if
they tell you these are the kinds of
conversations i had
what if they tell you that oh they are
interested in buddhist philosophy and
they really wanted to study that
uh but they dare not do so because of
their parents or their grandparents
wishes or their status and
in the church the religion what if they
tell you that they were interested
sorry that sort of conversation i would
have i was a scholar of buddhism at the
time
you know what if they tell you oh that
they are interested in this or that
um political
theory political ideology i come out of
a political science background
they were interested in more radical uh
political ideas and different approaches
to economics
but they dare not look into it because
of who their parents and grandparents
are because of their status and this
religion and this tradition that they're
devoted to perpetuating and indeed
for women especially i mean this is
honestly it's true of men also it's true
of men also it's just less
viscerally obvious that they're going to
devote their lives to reproducing the
same cultural values
the same myths the same legends the same
misconceptions in the next generations
that
men do within any one of these religious
identities also and even if the men are
out earning money
in the market and the women are
housewives that's still why
the men earning money that's still why
they're devoting their time to business
is to come home and and devote
themselves to tending this
fire as i've put to uh keeping the lives
of the per
and the next generation inside this
museum of ossified
cultural values um
you know and someone like this might say
to you that they had some particular
um aspiration in life
maybe it was to go into the sciences
and conduct research to find a cure for
cancer
let's do something a bit corny uh maybe
it was to
read and write about the philosophy of
aristotle do something
you know and maybe maybe the person
we're talking to was quite shallow
and really what they wanted to do was
become a fitness instructor at a gym
and have an instagram profile
and be adored for their appearance you
know you know that's probably
statistically it's more likely that
that's what they're fantasizing about
rather than finding a cure for cancer or
studying and publishing articles about
the philosopher's stuff just just
talking about the common man here they
might have had some dreams
for some other some of us maybe they
wanted to join the army
and see the world you know but all of
those dreams
are inaccessible forever they'll never
even get to dabble in them enough
to become disillusioned with them and
find better dreams you know what i mean
because of their commitment to that
cultural tradition because of this
extent to which they feel the whole end
to it
now let me just ask
where do the excuses stop
if we say it's okay for you to live in
ignorance
it's okay for you to never have this
kind of education
never have this kind of experience never
enter the workforce it's okay for you to
never do this
because you come from this culture and
you see how you see how
fine the difference there it's because
you're born into this culture it's
almost racism you know okay well that's
that's fine for you
and in the so-called mosaic of our
multicultural society that's fine for
you and you and you and you it's fine
for all these people
who fit into these different boxes
to live a life of pious self-righteous
ignorance do we
extend that to medicine do we
feel that there's one set of
scientific conclusions about medicine
about health that apply to all humanity
equally
or not and what does what does or not
mean what is the alternative there
now this critique actually applies to a
great many people who think that they're
atheists
think that they're secular think that
they have modern values that they aren't
a member of any cult
just as much as it applies to people who
you know wear the costume
of an orthodox religion every day um
i think in the 21st century we're at a
sort of transitional period of not
really wanting to admit to ourselves
how little freedom of belief there is
how little
freedom of religion there is when it's
applied to medicine
health and nutrition and when it's then
applied to everything else at least
as a matter of allegory if not directly
in and of its
in and for its its own sake um
we all seem to be willing to pretend
that it's
perfectly fine and healthy and normal
for a muslim family to circumcise their
son
for a jewish family to circumcise their
son now there's absolutely nothing
normal or healthy about circumcision
what we're really saying and offering
this justification or excuse
is that belief personal belief
trumps supersedes is is
superior in priority to
the facts of science now at the other
end of the
of the spectrum pretty much every week
if not every month i see people
uploading youtube videos
talking about their decision to take
stimulants like adderall
to take mood-altering mind-altering
drugs whether they are called
antidepressants or antipsychotics or
some other form of prescription
medication
pardon me prescription medication
i see people also justifying their
decision to use
illicit illegal drugs recreational drugs
which may
if they're not legal they may be
tolerated things like marijuana
and they appeal to the same
fundamental logic it is really a kind of
multiculturalism and it's culture
in our context hippies are in effect
another culture under themselves there
are these people who live with
excuses for smoking marijuana that are
passed down to them by their parents and
grandparents
and many of them will tell you that i've
met people who will say openly that they
smoke marijuana with their parents
if not their grandparents that they have
been assured that they believe that this
is harmless
or even that this is good for their
health there are women who will tell you
in the same
terms that they smoked marijuana during
pregnancy
there are women who will tell you that
they smoked cigarettes during pregnancy
they drank alcohol
during pregnancy and that their parents
did before them and this is
this has the power of a continuous
cultural
tradition and how dare you question it
how dare you insult them
and their whole lineage their whole
cultural
tradition needless to say this is
applied also
to the minutia of the human diet where
somehow the notion that something is
traditionally considered healthy
has superior priority
to any mere facts of science you may
introduce into the discussion uh to
disrupt it
now let's let's be honest here too um
the facts of science for the vast
majority of normal people are
unknowable uh babe could you grab your
your book
um off the top doesn't matter just gonna
give an example
so this is a book that's actually
mentioned on the channel many times over
over many years
this is called anatomy of an epidemic by
robert
whittaker so this this is
primarily about the evils of
mind-altering prescription drugs
primarily
but it's also a story of how people
justify their addiction to these drugs
all kinds of people
the the doctors who make the
prescriptions the marketing companies
that make
money out of it the corporations that
that profit from you know ordinary
people
you know like you and i i do not mean
in a shallow or caddy sense that this
is fundamentally similar to the world's
religions
there is a kind of religiosity involved
there is a kind
of um self
righteous ignorance involved and
there's an assertion of your cultural
identity
in feeling that you're entitled to your
own facts
in the same way that the christians are
and the muslims are and the jews are
and somehow external facts presented by
unbelievers they don't
they don't intersect with they don't
interfere with your view of reality or
they ought not that it's
it's a fundamentally you know immoral
thing
um
when i was living in saskatchewan
so if you guys don't know the geography
of canada
saskatchewan is a large
underpopulated part of canada where land
is cheap
and where there are many many religious
cult groups
that have colonies so still today if you
wanted to start a
cult if you want to start this a
separate community
for people of your own beliefs it's this
kind of place you you might go
by a farm by some wasteland or something
and start living there but obviously a
hundred years ago and 200 years ago
was it was even cheaper this is related
to our history of genocide in case you
haven't guessed
um
[Music]
you know i had face-to-face discussions
with attractive young women there
and these young women
i think were talking to me and were in a
very repressed way
flirting with me precisely because
i represented the outside world
that they had been forbidden to have any
kind of meaningful contact with
now everyone in my classes was really
kind of older
than you than you quote unquote should
be to be a university student like you
know if you've gone straight from high
school into
into university and there are different
reasons for this but the main one being
that the the university i was at and the
particular classes i was in
they were predominantly for people who
were
unsuccessful in uh the conventional
educational track like you know people
who had finished high school in the
correct number of years with high grades
they would go to some other university
let's put i had a lot of people in my
classes who were 25 but a lot of people
classes who were
35. i had a lot of older students but
even the people who were
relatively young they tended to be 22 or
23 and to say that they'd had a few
years as an alcoholic or something
uh in between high school and college
they you know they didn't really
graduate high school in the right number
of years there was a lot of that
there was a lot of that in regina
saskatchewan
so the actual women i'm thinking of they
were not they were not 19 years old or
something they were they were into their
they were into their 20s and you know
had a number of
a number of conversations with these
with these young women and
you know you can imagine in that context
where they are for the first time in
their lives having a little bit
of independence a little bit of freedom
of thought and action
from the religious colony that had
dominated their lives
the religious colony that probably
selected their husband
or at least put them in the room with
their choice of like four men
you know like well there are four guys
you can choose between get to know them
you take your
it might not be as simple as as a ranged
marriage but where they'd live
their lives um really with all of the
meaningful decisions made for them and
then they meet and talk to someone like
me and
there are different things about them
that might uh it's frightening
there are different things about me that
might interest them that might
excite their their curiosity you know
they would know
that i was somebody born and raised in
canada but who had made a
mercurial decision made a sudden
decision one opponent's life
to quit his job and run away and move to
cambodia
and again they wouldn't know all the
details but you know at some point in
the classroom they'd heard this about me
some part of them again i'm not saying
i'm not saying these women
if if they were not part of a
traditional culture they were not part
of one of these subcultures in our
multicultural side
i'm not saying they would have devoted
themselves to finding the cure for
cancer or
even philosophy of aristotle but yeah
you know what it probably
crossed their mind it probably crossed
their mind at least
what if there were a better life out
there somewhere what if for just a
couple
years or for a couple of months they
could run away to cambodia or on a way
to thailand
or run away to china or run away to
japan or something
if if they could get out of the rusted
cage of the culture they've been born
into
and think new thoughts and have new
experiences and in some sense
see the world i don't think that's
attributing you know too vivid a fancy
life you know to them so
they were meeting me and they were aware
that i was someone who in this way had
had lived you know with with particular
women i talked to this way you know
i could add in particular details about
what their own struggles in life were
and how they
how they perceive me now by the way so
we're choosing a selection here where
there is
in our in our culture in our politics
there's no
um there's no racial distinction between
them and i we're all considered white
people in canada
but by the way that's obviously that's
also endlessly debatable
you know in what sense is a ukrainian
person
the same race as a scottish person well
it's all it's all i mean it's
all just ideology
it's all culture it's all politics you
know and me as someone who is perceived
as an exotic
jew uh my my very judaism am i really
the same way says
as any of these people who self-identify
as white you know
but i'm just pointing out this is a this
is a context in which we can really talk
about
culturism very separately from
from racism uh i'd have to go back more
years
uh to talk about an example of a muslim
woman who who rejected me this way
when i was still in toronto again this
comes down to my appearance
there were muslim women women born and
raised in muslim
families and they they perceived me and
again
judaism ethnically the difference
between someone being jewish and someone
being arab is a rounding error in the
in the mathematics of dna but you know
they maybe perceive me as someone who
might be arab or who might be
iranian and there may be drawn
interesting
way i'm remembering just two uh women
who were who were born and raised
muslim and where they had these kinds of
conversations with me
so again you could imagine
you can imagine intellectually and
politically
and in terms of life experience how i
might represent to them the path
they hadn't taken or the path they
hadn't taken
yet because here they were as university
students
with this freedom from their family with
these possibilities but obviously just
visualizing things if you're thinking
about me being in saskatchewan and
talking to
young women who in a sense have their
whole life ahead of them right
who are born and raised as white
christians of some kind but some of
these christian groups
these are really crazy cult like
isolated christian groups right
you know okay so that's one scenario and
then think about also i'm in toronto and
talking to someone
who is of some kind born to a
traditional
muslim family who ethnically in their
appearance appears to some extent
you know arab or you know
or pakistani or what have you who
ethnically appears to be
non-white and who in their style of
dress and so on may be distinguishing
themselves
from the white western uh macro culture
or colonial
european culture you know in a different
way all right
now you know in those conversations
what if i had the attitude oh no no no
you shouldn't question what your parents
and grandparents
and religious tradition have decided is
best for you oh no no you shouldn't
think about any of these things you're
asking me about at all
oh no no and why
because you've been born into that
culture because you've been born
into that race oh no no no these are
good questions these are good
options for me to consider but not for
you
some things are just off limits to you
because of the circumstances of your
birth that would be a dismissive and
contemptuous attitude really quite
similar
to racism really quite shockingly
similar to racism
and we're all supposed to indulge in it
for the sake of multiculturalism for the
sake of this greater
whole that we're supposed to comprise
with each tribe
with each confessional unit of their
religion
you know comprising a separate uh a
separate piece
in the mosaic with invidious you know
distinctions
between each of them um
now each of these people would have had
different intellectual potential
different yearnings different desires
different interests and it's not for me
to know them
it's not for me to know who has the
potential in them to find a cure for
cancer or to spend their life at least
researching it
you know who has it in them to go to
cambodia and do humanitarian work who
has it in them to
become a great writer or a great
political leader
but you know free thinking freedom of
thought
you know it's crucial to all of them
whether their dreams be
uh pathetic and narrow and vain and
shallow
you know whether they want to be another
instagram influencer that wanted to
fitness or whether it be something you
know profound
something of tremendous meaning for them
in their lives
for society as a whole or for the
cluster of 50 or 500 people
they managed to to directly you know
influence you know
it's very easy to say and you'll see why
i'm saying about a young woman
specifically
it's very easy to say about a young
woman oh you have your whole life ahead
of you
you can do anything okay
not if you get married at 16
not if you're pregnant and having
children at age 16
17 right right you don't have your whole
life ahead of you you have this one
thing that you're allowed to do that's
set down for you
by your religion by your cultural
tradition and then you're never gonna
have the opportunity to do anything else
you're never gonna have the opportunity
to go to cambodia you never have the
opportunity to see the world you never
get the opportunity
even to join the army or anything you're
never going to have i mean again let's
put in some shallow examples here
maybe they wanted to work in fashion
maybe they wanted to
try their hand at designing and making
clothes
being a creative person that way i'm
just i'm just trying to use some
examples that aren't so much in my
you know my own uh area of of expertise
or inclination
you know what whatever it is they might
have done or could have done maybe they
wanted to be an artist maybe they wanted
to be a comedian
it's a great example actually you know
um
whatever potential they could have had
all of it
all of it is suffocated all of it is
destroyed
by culture
and there is a kind of racism if you
walk through
the university halls and you see a young
woman who is wearing the full
orthodox muslim uniform or the full
orthodox jewish
uniform and again it's it's more subtle
but there are cues about women who are
members of fundamental
fundamentalist christian organizations a
certain kind of dress
i don't know if it's this certain kind
of flower print dress
and maybe a cross around their neck you
can meet women who are part of
you know forms of forms of christianity
they're just as just as repressive
you know why those for you to walk
through the halls and think oh
there's no potential being wasted here
there's nothing being squandered there's
no tragedy
there's nothing being lost at all
there's no positive contribution
she could have made to the world that's
being lost
because of what this culture has done to
her and the best thing for us
as a society is to allow all of these
subcultures to exist
side by side unchallenged each one
ruining the lives
of its of its members each one enforcing
you know the self-righteous ignorance of
generations of the past
on the present and the future in this in
this terrible matter
um we lack the vocabulary
to even speak in terms of the
destruction
of culture the demolition of culture and
it's precisely the demolition of culture
the demolition of false
cultural assumptions beliefs attitudes
that is the government's
responsibility that is the role of
democracy
to open the way to any and every
possible
future right i do not believe in
destroying one specific culture in order
to
replace it with another no in the same
sense
i can think of any of these particular
young women i spoke to
my point is not oh oh no no you should
quit
uh christianity and instead join
mormonism
no you should you should instead have an
arranged marriage and be part of a
different oppressive
particular religion you know my point is
not that people should
leave islam in order to join the
hutterites hutterites are a particular
form of
christian no no no no no you know and
my point is not even that they should
give up their beliefs
their cultural uh tradition in order to
adopt
mine my particular set of atheists
open-minded my my particular set
of cultural values if you want because
it's inescapable no matter how much you
reject
cultural values there are some that
continue to you continue to
live by or espouse just in the same
sense that uh no matter how much you may
reject one set of aesthetic standards or
another there's still a set of aesthetic
standards you're living by
you one has to wear clothes of one kind
or another no matter how much you may
reject or revile the fashions of any
particular religious or cultural
tradition
um uh you're still going to settle on
some set of cultural values that you
live by
even if it's with with no such uh
ideological or religious
commitment to any of them at all you
know my point is not to
demolish one thing in order to build
another the point is precisely
to demolish the culture that constrains
and oppresses you
so that you have the freedom the freedom
of thought
the freedom of action the freedom to sit
and look at the future of your life like
a blank sheet of paper
and come up with any number of
possibilities many of which you may try
and quickly become disillusioned with
and then find new possibilities you know
to put on this
piece of paper now it is conspicuous and
it is quite intentional
that i've been talking about young women
as the examples of this let's let's
briefly talk about old men
by by contrast okay what's different
when we talk about
old men what's different is precisely
the extent to which
older men will insist that they are not
oppressed
but that they are the oppressor
right the extent to which old men wants
us no no no
nobody has forced me into this nobody
has cornered me into living by these
beliefs nobody has forced me to close
the door
on these other options in my life they
will describe themselves and think of
themselves and present themselves
as if they have boldly and heroically
taken on these cultural values
themselves
and and chose them and that they go
around making that choice for other
people
whom they frankly dominate terrify and
oppress
it's very very difficult to get a 45
year old man
to think of himself as a victim of the
culture of
circumcision right
and whether they are a member of a
religion that
forbids drinking alcohol or that
basically encourages it and requires it
at regular religious festivals you know
again you can be a devout christian
and you're drinking alcohol and all
these all these events whatever you know
um when you talk to older men
they will insist that this wasn't
something
enforced upon them but it's something
that they embrace that they espouse and
that they enforce on others
whether that's that they force others to
not drink alcohol or that
you know every year they go to this
ceremony and they're the guy and forcing
others to go hey you know this is our
tradition
you know get drunk enjoy enjoy whatever
it is that they they take on the role
you know of of the oppressor now
obviously this is a delusion
you know you could say to any one of
these men
i've i've engaged in this kind of
socratic dialogue all the time oh
okay so
if you hadn't been born in the into the
particular family
you were born into and the family of
course has cultural as well as
racial and economic connotations do you
do you think you would have come up with
this idea of circumcision all by
yourself
hypothetically if you were raised as an
orphan
by a robot in a government
orphanage so there's a sense in which
you have no culture at all you're making
it up as you go along you know
if you were raised do you think one day
you would have thought yourself
you know what i need to pay a surgeon to
cut off part of my dick
you know what i should force my sons and
grandsons
to also cut off part of their death as a
sign
of their commitment to the
judeo-christian
god i just you've never read the bible
you've never been told or taught it's
never been inculcated into you that this
is virtuous by your parents
of course it's ridiculous and of course
the very men
who think of themselves as the
oppressors are themselves
oppressed in a in an ongoing cycle that
that is what we call
culture and culture is precisely what
trains you
to regard your oppression as something
you are not ashamed of but something
you're proud of
right and you know down to
you know the the smallest details of
religious tradition uh give you an
example many religions have this by the
way
i could use irish catholics as an
example of this or i could use
uh muslims from the you know from saudi
arabia
you the idea
that walking in a circle around an
object
circumambulation is something profound
and holy that it's an act of
introspection and so on
you know did you did you make that up
who taught you
to walk in a circle this was mentioned
it's a form of religious devotion it's
quite
widespread we have we have things
similar to it in buddhism but this idea
of
walking in a circle around an object
often you know having your hands clashed
together perhaps
mumbling you know mumbling and prayer or
chanting you know a textbook
you know the idea of circumambulation of
walking in a circle
was if you were raised in an orphan you
know
if you were raised in an orphanage by a
robot do you think you would have been
there do you think it could
be that you saw your grandfather doing
this and you asked him why he was doing
he explained to you
that this was the most divine and holy
and wonderful thing that you you know
that every man is part of your manhood
you know so that oh perhaps this
grandfather also said you
well you know a lot of young people
these days can't appreciate it there are
a lot of teenagers who just think it's
stupid
but they're not like you you're special
you're smarter than the other teenagers
you're more more profound you can
appreciate
our tradition you have to carry it on
you have to be
this stuff gets to you man i mean this
that you don't you don't think you're
having this burden
place your oh oh no no this is precisely
what makes you better than your friends
your friends
they laugh and jeer at some of us who
are carrying on the traditions of our
grandparents
but not you you're special sorry to come
back to the female
example it's not the case it's not the
case that every girl
raised in that colony will remain a
virgin until marriage and get
married at 16 and and so on and be
having a raising a
chubby thing oh no no the girls who
carry on they think they're
special they think they're superior to
the other girls i swear i mean obviously
this is to my knowledge
but if you know people from those small
towns there are always a few girls there
are a few girls who ran away
to los angeles or ran away to vancouver
and maybe they even got a job in a strip
club or something that even if that's
not true that the people in the small
town
say right like oh you know i remember a
guy told me at death it was a
small town and there was there was one
girl who was officially
the prettiest girl in the the small town
and she did she ran away to become a
stripper
but you know in every one of those
religious communities there are stories
about the fallen
the castaways the rebels the people who
went
elsewhere to live a different life oh
but but you're not like them
you're better than them this is the
tremendous power
that culture has in our lives and we
take
up the oppression of ourselves and
others
not with the sense that we are the
victims but that we are the victors
that it's something we can and should be
be proud of and tell me in the in the
21st century
you know who is going to break this
cycle
who is going to challenge it it has to
be the government and it has to be a
democratic government it has to be
through democracy
you know this is the year
2021. people are still
questioning people are still questioning
the morality
of the government forcing
cultural minorities to accept vaccines
this is not a trivial aspect
of democracy okay this is not something
um peripheral to
democracy right this is the beating
heart
of democracy okay we had a meeting
we let the public speak down at the
panics
we made a decision and now you have to
live with the consequences
or else be exiled
all right uh just digress slightly here
you may know
my preference is for direct democracy
rather than directly if you want to if
you want to jump in
melissa is uh participating in her way
off camera here
uh one of the best
recorded examples of how democracy
worked in ancient athens
is the peloponnesian war it's basically
the history of wars between
athens and sparta and to some extent by
the way persia
is involved in all these wars now you
may not know this if you have another
reading okay
it is not the case that everyone in
athens
supported the athenian side in those
wars and it's kind of several
overlapping and inter-mexican wars
there there were people there were
people born and raised in
athens who sympathized more with
sparta there were people born and raised
in athens
who went and fought for the spartan army
there were people born and raised in
athens
who went to fight for persia
for the persian army for the medies okay
there's some of them but there's some of
the most famous okay there was there was
free thinking
you had a choice right so there's a
there's a debate
down at the panx pnyx if you don't know
the meaning of the word
there's a debate down in the peninsula
and you know there are different options
athens can be at peace with sparta like
at different times
athens can be in an alliance with sparta
against the persians
athens could be in alliance with the
persians against the spartans that
happened repeatedly
even though we think of the persians as
if they were the constitution and you
know what
there's a debate there's a discussion
there's a vote
and once that vote is taken
either you accept the decision that's
been made
democratically and you fight on the same
side as everyone else
or you are exiled or you are killed now
uh i don't have it with a big could you
grab machiavelli it could be
uh oh no no no no it'll be it'll be
there mickey village discourses
if you can't get it you can't get it
there we go
okay just mentioned
this machiavelli is mostly famous for a
book called the prince which i
don't recommend reading frankly it's
really overrated the prince but he has a
much longer and more substantive book
called
the discourses and actually the parts of
this book that are worth reading it's
not the whole length you can kind of
read it there's some sections you can
flip through and there's others where
you really want to slow down and read
intensely so you're saying it's not
not really a cover to cover a great book
but worth reading and some sections of
it tremendously worth reading
tremendously
inspirational you know that
machiavelli's an interesting character
he is
pro-democracy anti-air
anti-oligarchy anti-uh monarchy
anti-aristocracy he is very
fundamentally a pro-democracy writer
which many people don't know
because they only read the prince so his
philosophy says here it's quite
interesting
machiavelli is the most brutally
honest guy about the extent to which
democracy requires violence and to
sustain a republic
to rest to sustain even a mixed republic
a republic that is
partly democratic because that's mostly
what he talks about because in real life
you
you very rarely have direct democracy or
any society even as democratic as athens
athens was not a perfect democracy we
can list off its imperfections but we
rarely even approach
the level of democracy that was that
happened but you know the
level of violence required
against your own people to have a
democracy
um it's terrifying and machiavelli is
one of the guys saying hey
i'm not terrified
machiavelli is living through an
unbelievably dismal
violent period in the history of europe
and he's saying
we'd be better off going back to that
kind of violence the kind of violence
they had in ancient rome
the kind of violence they had in ancient
athens instead of the violence we're
stuck with now
in the dark ages you know instead of the
kind of violence that's necessary
to maintain a monarchy or an oligarchic
aristocratic system he'd rather have
that democratic
kind of violence right um
know you
are not allowed to decide whether or not
drinking alcohol during pregnancy is
safe
or healthy you're not right
now just just with this one example i
mean any of these examples
talk about circumcision talk about
drinking alcohol
during pregnancy um and by the way guys
just just another one because i've seen
this my whole life i remember seeing
this in france remember seeing this in
scotland
um smoking cigarettes
during pregnancy
will more than double the chances
that your child will be diagnosed
with adhd attention deficit
hyperactivity now
adhd is not
a biologically real condition it's not
it's a set of behaviors it's all it is
it's a stereotype
really okay but there are children
who are diagnosed with attention deficit
disorder
so that they can get some kind of help
so they can get some kind of
special education and in many cases so
that they can be put onto drugs like
adderall
so that they can participate in normal
classroom life i do not reify
attention deficit hypertension i'm not
here to tell you this is a biologically
real
condition
isn't it interesting that smoking
cigarettes during pregnancy
would double the chances that your child
has
something wrong with them has some kind
of limited cognitive function
that would get diagnosed as adhd result
in them getting special help
uh special classes hello guys you know
nicotine
what are what are the effects of
on a developing umbrella yeah that's an
interesting question
something that smoking cigarettes and
smoking marijuana
has in common with drinking alcohol will
just be the effects on
how much how much oxygen the developing
fetus or embryo is is getting all right
there are issues here with the
circulation of blood
with how much oxygen is being carried in
the blood
um
do you want to live in a society
where everyone gets to have their own
science
don't you want to live in a society
where um everyone gets to have their own
beliefs
go unchallenged and trump i'm sorry to
use trump as a
as a verb not using his proper name here
but
sort of where your cultural identity
your beliefs your traditions
even what your grandparents told you
what you hold to be
sacred where that trumps that
exceeds importance the facts of science
for the very real and measurable
consequences for yourself for your
children
frankly for the for the future of
humanity all right
in the same way that the stupidity of
the mother
in drinking alcohol during pregnancy or
smoking cigarettes during pregnancy
is inculcated upon the child
the child will be raised with
justifications and excuses for that
stupidity they'll be molded to repeat
that stupidity
this is the same way in which culture
reproduces self
across generations and
[Music]
i've never had anyone debate this with
me i've never had anyone dispute it with
me
i've never had anyone like whether by
email or face to face
i have never had anyone who was actually
motivated to try to convince me
that there is a point to the
perpetuation
of culture when they are asked simply
what is the point
culture is tragic you know
you can justify the mistakes made by
your parents you can justify the
decisions made
by your grandparents you can sort of try
to glorify
the self-righteous ignorance of your
cultural tradition whether it's the
immediate generation or
or many before but when you turn around
and look forward
when you look to the future you know
what would be the point of having these
same mistakes or having these same
beliefs
perpetuated into the future whether we
think of those
in terms of the aesthetic details
a cultural tradition of how pottery is
made
how pottery is supposed to or we're
thinking about these things that are so
easily and verifiably wrong
medical facts you know medical facts
that relate to your
your physical mental and emotional
health
you know now um
i just want to say you know i sympathize
with religious people i sympathize with
religious people more than you can know
because i think that the religions of
the world great and small
lead people to ask really important
questions
the problem is that they raise people to
presume that the answers to those
questions were already discovered by
their grandparents or great-grandparents
that they're not here to be asked and
answered by ourselves
multiple times within one generation
that they're they're unsettled
that the door remains open that the page
remains blank
you know again and again forever that
there isn't one
answer i'll give we'll give an example
that many of you
may be surprised for me to choose you
know
religious people grow up with a concept
of humility
i think is actually very interesting and
and profound you know i and
by and large people who are not
religious have no concept
of humility my parents were both
communists i'm an anti-communist
but you know they they had no concept of
humility none
shockingly some way and so you know for
me as a young man it was really
interesting as a kind of foreign concept
to explore and understand humility and
another religious idea i could i could
list up a whole bunch
the idea of detachment you know um
there all kinds of ideas i got from
religion there were important questions
now you know i can ask you a total point
what does humility mean in your life
what does it mean to be humble
what is the significance of it you know
what is the positive advantage
of cultivating humility and then what
are the disadvantages
right perhaps it's better in some ways
at least to be a recklessly narcissistic
uh instagram model or something you know
to be beautiful and know that you're
beautiful or handsome another handsome
into
you know to play that advantage you know
to the fore you know i don't think
humility is something
that has value in in and of itself right
you know so religion can can lead people
to ask meaningful questions
that have meaningful answers in their
lives but
nothing could be more mentally deadening
nothing could be more destructive
than to live with the assumption that
the meaning of humility
what it requires and what it entails in
your life is something already written
down in this book
that the answer was something already
established when your grandparents
joined this religion
and that it's obligatory on you to
follow exactly the same the same steps
you know of of what it means to be a to
be a humble person
you know now um
humility is not meaningless it's not
i heard an interview with a medical
doctor
a few weeks ago uh and i think it is
relevant to mention he is a very good
looking man
he apart from being born good looking he
takes a lot of care with his parents
and as a medical doctor in the united
states of america he probably gets a lot
of attention from
from women because he's wealthy and
successful and good looking and yeah so
and he talked about his recognition
of his own prejudice against
clients sick people who come into his
office
for help who are fat
ugly unkempt in english who are not
making an effort with their
with their appearance um who may smell
bad
uh he mentioned just a detail a guy who
came in
wearing blue jeans and there was mud
around the cuffs at the bottom of the
blue there was some mud you know near
his
nearest boots at the bottom of his blue
jeans that you know
people who don't and aesthetics okay
there's humility in being a
medical doctor right and the way in
which
humility really matters as a doctor as a
teacher as an authority figure
as in whatever position you have
in your life you know okay
just you know i used to do humanitarian
work
all right and i i was very different
from other people doing humanitarian
work
many of the people doing humanitarian
work really had a deep-seated attitude
that they were wealthy
and they represented a superior level of
scientific education
and they were coming to do humanitarian
work to to bring
truth to the conquered you know well
here are these poor third
world people and they just don't know
and don't understand the things that we
wealthy highly educated people know and
we're bringing to them this
civilization you know my attitude was
much more like an anthropologist doing
research
i was really interested in what these
people had to teach me
um i mean that totally unpretentiously i
mean that with a sense of humility
uh i give numerous examples but
you know i thought that someone who had
survived the indochina wars
someone who had survived uh the
americans dropping this enormous number
of bombs on their village
who had survived the rise and fall of
communism
who had a mixed background obviously in
agriculture
and you know guerrilla warfare
you know in this extreme poverty and
disease and in solving problems with
their hands
even if these people were illiterate
that they actually had a great deal to
teach me they knew many things about
life i would never
know um
[Music]
now you know also at that time i was a
scholar of buddhism
i felt correctly that these people knew
something about buddhism
i didn't know i to some extent i'm a de
facto
scholar of communism i'm an
anti-communist i think these people knew
something about communism you know i
didn't know
you know where i'm going there with a
kind of humility
that really makes me open to learning
from these people
now of course you're also going to learn
about their foolishness you're also
going to learn about all the things that
are wrong but
oh great example coming back to
the comparison with with medicine you
know so where i was
in northern laos southeast asia
poverty-stricken
war-torn you know people where i was
doing humanitarian work
uh people
drank nail polish remover
they specifically mixed nail polish
remover
with sugar cane juice
culturally that was normal
now how can anyone be unaware that
they're basically drinking paint thinner
you know um there were a number of
cultural practices that are just totally
ruminous
to people's health and i have no you
know no
sympathy or patience as well sorry i'm
not gonna i'm not gonna sit there and
say well you people have your own way of
doing things
no this is this is completely horrifying
uh but you know nevertheless
i am suggesting to you that humility
which is a religious
uh concept really has profound
significance in our lives
and you know i got to see the difference
i could see i could see the difference
between myself and other people doing
humanitarian work actually the
difference between myself and other
people doing
buddhist research and buddhist
scholarship oh did you think you came
here to preach
unto others or do you think you came
here to learn from others do you think
these people really have
really something to teach you and you
know i do live my life
with that with that kind of humility i
meet
the kind of ignorant rednecks um
when i talk to them i mean you know
whatever they may be a plumber or they
may be doing whatever kind of job they
do
i actually really do have those
conversations with the assumption they
have a great deal
to teach with me about life they they
have things to teach me
about areas of life that i have not
researched i don't begin the
conversation thinking you know this is
this person knows more about aristotle
than i do i don't believe that but they
will know
things about about life in other areas
and other provinces they will have other
experiences they can share with me that
i really do value or i
really have the humility to recognize
what they have to bring into my life
even if it's on this on this small scale
okay so i just say um
[Music]
as an atheist as
a radical nihilistic dissident
intellectual who openly talks about
destroying christianity you know
i still sympathize with religious people
and their attitudes more than you could
know
because i sympathize with the extent to
which religion raises
really important and meaningful
questions in their lives what i don't
sympathize with is the way in which
religion provides answers
i have never once had a single
atheist or so-called skeptical youtube
channel
cooperate or collaborate with me in any
positive way whatsoever
several of them if you've watched the
channel a long time you may know several
of them have attacked and announced me
and insulted me in crude terms um
i have never once had any positive
collaboration with anyone who considers
themselves to be part of atheism
as a movement all right i think just
pause to clarify
that's because of multiculturalism it is
absolutely part of the multicultural
mentality in the same way
that we encourage one another by saying
oh well
i personally wouldn't drink alcohol i
know that alcohol causes brain damage
i personally wouldn't take adderall
i know that's an it's an addictive drug
that causes brain damage
you know i know that the medical
benefits are largely illusory and the
disadvantages are all too scientifical i
i personally
wouldn't smoke marijuana oh oh
oh oh but here's the motto of 21st
century
multiculturalism but you do
you
i i personally wouldn't want to be 200
pounds overweight
[Music]
but if it makes you happy
you you do you right
this is the tapestry of our tolerant
society
this is the mosaic right it's not just
narrowly defined religious and cultural
beliefs
that are supposed to be uh justified and
passed unquestioned
and be permitted it's any belief
whatsoever right that's what these
things that's what these things extend
the so-called atheist activists
the so-called skeptics
what they want is only to have one more
tile in the mosaic one little square
that will sit next to the vietnamese
subculture
and the saudi arabian subculture and the
hutterite subculture and the devout
catholic
subculture they just want to have their
own
little square in the multicultural
mosaic
and to feel that they're superior to
everyone else
in exactly the same way that the
catholics feel
superior to them in exactly the same way
that the devout muslims
feel superior to them they want that
derision
to be mutual and they want to have a
fundamentally mutually derisive society
in which the invidious distinctions
between each tile comprising the
mosaic are smoothed over with this
attitude already alluded to of hey
hey you do you right
yeah yeah
um i i remember a woman
who was not jewish um shall we say a
witness to the jewish holocaust
uh describing passionately how she had
tried to get
food provided to jewish children it's
not worth describing the whole scenario
in world war ii this is kind of
a refugee scenario and um
she was saying to the people in charge
of the christian charity
that was handing out food only to
christians i said
she said don't you realize their stomach
doesn't know the difference
like whether they eat or starve has
nothing to do with their
you know ideological commitment to
christianity
you know versus judaism and she she
described just the hard hateful
reactions of these women
some of whom were nuns but others were
just you know true believing christians
involved in this charitable practice
of you know starving some children and
feeding others
you know on this basis you know
your stomach doesn't know
the difference you know your lungs your
brain
your body chemistry doesn't know the
difference
right we're using these drugs or
any of these examples right either it is
right
or it is wrong and if it's wrong then
it's equally wrong
for everyone
of course it's very convenient that
we're living through a period of time in
which there is almost
zero democracy you know in the in the
western world
um
could you imagine living in a society
where you had a debate
and the final conclusion was that um
circumcision should be illegal for
everyone except the people who believe
in it
does that make sense that seemed like
something the panics or like some kind
of really authentic
direct democracy oh well you know um
nobody should cut off part of their dick
unless you believe in it unless it's
part of your religion
unless it's part of your culture that's
exactly the contradiction we're all
we're all living with right and the
ridiculous position of the other atheist
youtubers the other secular
activist viewers is that they they
continue this to perpetuate this pattern
you know they continue to perpetuate the
fact oh no no no
uh christmas should continue to be
celebrated by the people who believe in
it
circumcision could continue to be
celebrated by the but by the people who
believe in
every imaginable you know cultural
tradition
that muslims should carry on being
muslims just not
us atheists that we should have our own
you know our own place in the panoply
of uh of minority traditions
i don't think uh this is what all
atheists believe but i think it's
interesting that the people who become
activists
who become voices for and
representatives for the movement and
have youtube channels
the people who end up in those positions
and end up being supported with
considerable amounts of money as far as
i know by the way
you know in terms of donations i think
it's it's significant that that's
that that's the pattern you know um
all right
i'm gonna close this part of the video
i'm going to address kind of one more
category and then
then i'm going to wrap it up i have not
been able to read uh
your comments in the audience i assume
that's just an error on youtube's part
again if you want to take a moment hit
the thumbs up button might help a few
more people discover the video but
no big deal either way i make about 200
a month out of this hobby
and obviously if i had been motivated by
money i would not have said
i would not have said half of the things
in this video that i've said um
this is no way to earn earn a living on
social media
um i do this because i think it's the
right thing to do
i do this for all the reasons i've
already talked about earlier in this
video
i do this to have a positive impact you
know on the lives of the 15 or 50
people i can really meaningfully uh
change
through my own influence through my own
example however when i put it
you know i do this to make the world a
better place to change society to change
the future
of the society i live in and so on to
the extent that i can
but you know what
most of all i do this to change myself
the most fundamental choice i gotta make
is who i'm gonna be and who i'm gonna
become
and it changes right it changes year by
year
and many in the audience you may not
feel this or may not feel it
yet if in watching my
youtube videos you know some of your
attitudes
have changed if you've become
unwilling to make some of the
compromises you lived with before
i think you'll be amazed how within the
passage of time with it within the
passage of a few years
how who you are changes also without
you even making a decision without you
making any sacrifice
you know um you'll become
a different person frankly just because
you've thought some of these things
through thoroughly that maybe you didn't
think through before
before they were animated shall we say
you know here on my youtube channel
the way in which we change is not always
voluntary although it's always
intellectual
have you ever reflected about a
relationship in your life
that um
you never made the decision to forgive
someone
but you discovered with the passage of
time that you had forgiven them
you don't always choose to forgive
people sometimes you just forgive people
you know you don't always choose the way
in which your own
character changes and
you know what why why forgive someone
and that
is it there are many reasons but one
scenario that's common enough that many
of you probably felt this way if you're
past the age of 30
you know one of the reasons why we
forgive people is that we realize
that the reason we resented them before
was
looking back at it now my reason for
being so angry my reason
you know what i know
okay in the same way without you making
any decision at all to change without
you making any sacrifices that you make
any commitment
who you are will change simply through
the realization and recognition that
things you made excuses for before
are
um i say this again and again in writing
and in my youtube videos i'm i'm
currently producing the final draft of
my book
you know um the excuses
are harder to quit than the thing itself
you know to quit making excuses for
something to
quit making excuses for your own culture
to quit making excuses for your own
religion
right to quit making excuses for the
decisions your parents made
your grandparents mad that's much harder
that's much harder than changing your
own behaviors changing your own
habits of life there are there are so
many people
raised muslim who start drinking alcohol
and eating pork you know they just start
living a modern life
when the once they're in their own
apartment and have their own job right
like when they go back and visit their
parents they don't do those things
right but what they can't quit is making
excuses
for the cultural identity they want to
perpetuate it's much harder
right and of course you can quit making
the excuses
and you you could continue living the
lifestyle so you could continue refusing
to drink alcohol if you need pork
you know that's really the deeper
challenge
and change and just admitting to
yourself
you might not choose you might not
decide you might not sacrifice
just admitting to yourself this is
with the pasture of time it changes
have you ever known you ever known a
young woman who was passionate about
fashion about designer clothes
they they may not choose they may not
make a choice they may not
sacrifice you know they may reach a
point in their lives where they start
regarding
fashion and designer clothes as
my point this is not unique
to there's not unique to religion i say
in your personal relationships
you know you resent that person so much
for something they did to harm you in
the past whatever it is
and then you regard that as as
and you find that you've forgiven them
you know um
okay wrapping up the first half of this
video
um or the first nine tenths i don't have
that much more to say
[Laughter]
you know in what sense
is culture a tragedy
in what sense am i presenting
multiculturalism therefore is something
tragic
you know um
you have to have a clear sense of
human potential that's counter posed
to culture as soon as we recognize that
as soon as we recognize the humanity of
people who are members of these
rival religions and rival cultures
then we can recognize the extent to
which each and every culture
really is bad and evil and wrong
right now some of you may feel i had a
great advantage in life
in being raised in a free-thinking
quote-unquote free-thinking
atheist household okay my parents were
communists
my parents made excuses for joseph
stalin from mao zedong for lenin
and that's what i grew up with that's
what i had to challenge and i don't
return
okay um people who make excuses for
saying a prayer
before they eat dinner another very
visceral example
children who are taught to say a prayer
before they write a test
in class before they write the math test
before they write the science test
so they'll get a higher grade because
these are the ways in which we live with
you know beliefs and traditions each and
every one of us had something to
challenge in the culture
we were raised had something to to
overturn right
um you know
it's possible you've known someone what
i'm going to say now is kind of parallel
to my critique of
video games you know it's possible
you've known someone
who was so mentally disabled who was so
severely limited in their cognitive
ability
that you just think you know what
there's no point
in trying to convince this guy to stop
praying there's no point in convincing
this guy that when he talks to god
he's just talking to himself this guy is
so mentally disabled he's so mentally
limited that we're just going to step
back and let him keep
living his life that way so i i say this
is parallel to some of the questions
i've raised with video game addiction
and video game playing
it is possible you know some young man
who is so disabled that you think well
like this guy
maybe he can never read a book maybe
he's really that disabled he's so
mentally limited
well then in that context maybe there's
no harm
in stepping back and letting him play
video games because he can never read a
book he can never have a job he can
never have a career and never make
progress
you know in other ways if you really
know someone who's that severely
mentally disabled i've mentioned this
before one of my own brothers
is so severely mentally disabled he has
never spoken a single sentence in the
english language he can't
speak he can basically eat you know
um it has been claimed to me about that
brother i don't know this that if you go
back and visit him several times
he won't recognize you he just sees you
as a person he can't remember a
distinguished individual people
that's been claimed to be about him but
i mean this is really severe
severe uh mental disability you know
what is the judgment you're making about
someone
let's just say you had a twin brother or
sorry if you're a female you have a twin
sister
let's say you had a twin brother or twin
who has exactly the same intellectual
potential you do
the same capacity for moral
responsibility the same capacity to make
the world
a better place would you look at that
twin brother
and say you know what
it's fine for you to spend the rest of
your life smoking marijuana
drinking alcohol playing video games
like it's fine for you to do that
because hey
you do you but not me i'm gonna hold
myself
to a higher standard
would it be fine for you to look at your
own twin brother
your own twin sister and make the
judgment you know what
it's fine for you to join this cult
to join this religion where you're going
to get married and pregnant at age 16 or
if it's a guy you're going to get
married and start raising raising a kid
with a girl
at age 16 and for you to live your whole
life
spending all your energy and efforts
justifying and continuing and
perpetuating the elements of this
culture in your style of dress in your
household in the fastidious habits that
define
every meal right and your calendar full
of religious occasions
in the prayers you say morning noon and
night
in the songs you sing and in all the
songs you refuse to listen to you can't
listen to the radio you can't watch
movies you have to live your whole life
in this very
narrow culturally defined space
rigorously devoted
just to just to living out this these
religious ideals would you look at your
own twin brother or twin sister someone
who is your equal intellectually in
every way
would you look at them and say you know
what that's fine for someone like you
but not me i want to live my life
answerable to some kind of higher stance
i want to hold myself to a higher
standard i want to pursue some kind of
excellence
even if i have no idea what it is even
if it is not something as
specific as finding the cure for cancer
or writing a book about the folks of
aristotle you have me
you may have no particular ambitions in
life
and yet you have ambition you have some
sense of some feeling for your own
human potential that there must be
something better
for you to do in your life even if it's
just that you're turning away from these
other things
that would that would limit it right so
this is ultimately an argument
about human potential and if we can see
if we can sense if we can feel if we can
appreciate
that human potential in others
right then we must see it as a tragedy
that they have wrapped their faces and
wrapped their bodies
in the symbols of these religious
traditions that they have devoted
themselves to the perpetuation of
culture
now throughout this video just to be
brief i've mostly been talking about
judaism christianity and islam
i've drawn on examples people have known
face to face obviously we could have
talked about mormonism we could have
talked about scientology
and i said in the earlier video i made
on the same topic the earlier video that
has multicultural is another title
i said there very clearly that even
though it is more subtle to perceive
this same critique can and should be
applied to buddhism it can and should be
applied to hinduism
i know a great deal i was a former
expert in buddhism i know great deal of
buddhism and hinduism i could talk about
jainism
the problem is the video would be much
longer because i really have to explain
a lot of things about these religions to
you
just people in the audience will not
come here with the level of familiarity
uh and i just mentioned i said i've been
unable to cooperate with other atheist
channels
when i started this channel i completely
assumed my main purpose
would be the critique of buddhism would
be talking about buddhism from an
atheist perspective as a former
scholar of buddhism i never found anyone
i could i could work with i never had
encouragement
i only had had discouragement and what
you hear instead again from the
so-called atheists the so-called secular
activists
all of them want to perpetuate these
cultural traditions all of them want to
believe
that meditation and yoga and ayurvedic
medicine
oh there's a great example of
pseudoscience oh do you think do you
think different cultures are allowed to
have different medicines
do you believe eating mercury eating the
liquid metal mercury do you think that's
that's justifiable by religion do you
think that's okay for a culture other
than own
um all this stuff and forcing yourself
to vomit putting a towel down your
throat all
unbelievably horrendous you know yogic
traditions and i heard traditions and
stuff oh you you believe in uh
believe in multiculturalism applying
that to medicine in india oh i got scary
quick
anyway i just say i would i would really
have to make a much longer video
to talk about buddhist traditions plural
or any particular
uh buddhist religion this way so i just
say
um when you were walking down that hall
or when you were walking on the street
if you dismiss the human potential the
intellectual potential the political
potential the creative potential of
these other people
just creativity again you're not
necessarily finding the cure for cancer
maybe you're going to be a painter maybe
you're going to be a poet
maybe you're going to write you know
write manuscripts like shakespeare
whatever you're going to do
maybe you're going to be a journalist
write something meaningful as a
journalist
if you are walking past people who wrap
themselves in the symbols of religion
whether that be judaism christianity or
islam
who are living their lives in this
narrow way being beholden to the errors
and self-righteous ignorance of their
own ancestors their parents their
grandparents
going back to time and memorial or
possibly just their own parents
converted to islam could you be just one
generation ago
this essentially if you think nothing is
lost there
then you are making a judgment on them
you are in effect saying
you are not my twin brother or my twin
sister you are not my equal in
intellectual
potential there nothing lost with you
making the wrong decision that you're
willing to dismiss and diminish
everything they could do in their lives
right you're making the decision that
basically they are as cognitively
impaired
as someone from nothing better is
possible anyway
so why not let them continue talking to
their imaginary friend
why not let them continue living their
lives in this
in this terrible hopeless dead-ended way
right
so on the video by responding to a
comment that was in the uh
in the comment section with my with my
last video um
[Music]
this challenge is the whole
multicultural paradigm from a different
perspective
um someone commented
and it's completely understandable
someone commented that they they still
think
we should have multiculturalism as far
as cuisine
is concerned as far as restaurants are
concerned that's
obviously it's a very it's sympathetic
sympathetic
counter right um so the point is here
in the year 2021 almost every
corner of the world has chinese
restaurants
indian restaurants remarkably i
everywhere i go in the world i see
ethiopian
restaurants a very specific culture of
cuisine
that there should be french restaurants
and so on
it's um fair to say that one of the
distinctions between a major city and a
small town of no importance
is the extent to which there is this
kind of cultural diversity
in cuisine
what does it mean though really when you
presume
or assert that indian
food should be or has to be cooked by
indian people
that chinese cuisine should be or has to
be
cooked by chinese people
there's a very strange trivial pardon me
there's a very strange
trivialization of precisely the cultures
that we're supposedly trying to preserve
or uphold under the heading of
multiculturalism this comes back to the
question of
the government structure of education
and and the extent to which
multiculturalism really has been
a kind of conspiracy to recruit low-wage
labor
into our societies uh and this is not at
all been a government policy of actually
bringing in
cultural leaders to to represent their
culture to share their culture to teach
our culture to do to benefit us
to enrich our culture with their own um
you know if the chinese language
is worth learning it cannot
possibly be that it is only worth
learning
only worth studying only worth teaching
to people who are ethnically chinese
that makes no sense at all that makes no
sense at all
why would you create chinese language
classes that are only by and for
ethnically chinese people now
i am ethnically jewish i have to bear
persecution and racism my whole life
because this it's always been an issue
it still is
if you think i'm joking i'm not you know
anti-semitism is very real
in the 21st century and i have to you
know prepare my daughter
to also deal with that her whole life
long i've had youtube videos talking
about this so
i live under this peculiar kind of
scrutiny
all right what would it mean
if you said that it was only
significant that it was only culturally
important
for jewish people to learn and study
hebrew
not non-jewish people
the most important thing of all is to
have people
who are not jewish learning hebrew
precisely so that they can cross-examine
criticize from a detached outsider's
perspective
from an atheist perspective from a
nihilist perspective
what is written in hebrew not just in
the bible of course that's important of
course it's important to have
secular free thinking outside
eyes the eyes of people who are free
thinking
secular outsiders cross-examining and
criticizing what's in the bible what's
going on in religious studies
basically to debunk the the beliefs of
people
we need people who can read the
newspapers
in modern hebrew and who can basically
say what it is what's going on
we need people who can
really in a a liberal way in this sense
criticize and cross-examine what's going
on within israeli politics that's
tremendously important
suddenly it seems as if the outsider's
perspective and again it's not really
because you're from the outside
it's because you're an atheist it's
because you're annihilus because you
have detachment
it's because you have these different
motivations suddenly that seems
much more valuable than people within
the culture
perpetuating the culture right and as i
say
you know what i'm challenging here is
the assumption that what each of us
ought to do morally is devote ourselves
to
maintaining a museum to the cultural
values of our
our forefathers our ancestors right
instead i'm presenting a view of society
that's dynamic and forward-looking
that is constantly engaged in the
demolition
of its cultural traditions and in the
generation of new as yet unknown
cultural conditions right um
obviously if it is worthwhile
if it is meaningful enough for someone
to make the sacrifice
to learn chinese it is
more worthwhile it is more rewarding
it's more important for
all of us that non-chinese people and
the people who don't believe in
china or chinese necessary don't believe
in this culture that don't value the
culture who don't value their village
you don't value the tradition
it is much more important that detached
outsiders learn chinese and bring that
critical perspective and they've got to
bring that critical perspective to
ancient texts that are the chinese
equivalent to the bible chinese doesn't
have a bible but it has ancient texts
like
sunza lord shan confucius there are
these ancient
hallowed texts that they that they bring
a critical outsider's perspective to
communism in china
and that they even bring a critical
outsider's perspective to to the bible
right
and then if it's not worth doing it's
not what we're doing for anyone now in
case you hadn't guessed i had to make
these arguments
about learning pali for buddhism
learning the ancient scriptural language
for buddhism
i had to make these arguments about
people learning
cree and ojibwe who are neither cree
nor ojibwe what's the significance of
knowing the kree language or the object
language
is it just so that people who happen to
be born in that ethnic group
can endlessly repeat the same rituals
live as if they're in a museum devoted
to their ancestral past
no there has to be something productive
there has to be something
forward-looking
i'll always remember the shock that was
on the face of one of my professors
when i talked to him about writing the
first
chemistry textbook in korea i said when
are we going to start working on
high school textbooks for chemistry and
biology
and like explaining the theory of
evolution you know in cree
in ojibwe he had never thought of this
he didn't have a
forward-looking view of the use of the
language
either we're going to do that or or not
at all i had so many people
do digress briefly they got so excited
and inspired when i told them the
research project i was going to ask for
um research funding for i said well you
know the
the the so-called elders in these tribal
groups you know people talk about them
as if they're from 500 years ago
you know sorry but human lifespan is
what it is
so well the main thing they lived
through was the cold war
with the soviet union and many of their
these remote first nations uh
reservations really their experience of
history had to do with
military bases and missile silos and the
threat of the russians invading that was
really
and most of what they heard about on the
radio and saw on tv living in
terminators
so i was going to do a research project
based on you know the history of just
the last 50 years
that was the kind of people got so
excited and they didn't think of the
language that way they didn't think of
talking to the tribal others that way
they thought you went to the tribal
elders and you asked them questions
about what life was like 500 years ago
and then you just worshiped and
preserved this idea of being a hunter
who you know rides in a canoe yeah well
you know what i want to know about is
you know
what did the atom bomb mean to you
like if you you are maybe old enough to
remember when you were a child
first learning about the atom bomb being
dropped on japan
then you moved into this long period of
history of being terrified that your own
country would be destroyed by the atom
bomb
and you live near this military base and
nothing else because it's remote areas
of rural canada
okay um you know
so again i think this comes back to us
at the very start of the video
where just the words we associate with
culture
we think of cultural preservation we
don't think about cultural production
okay and cultural production absolutely
entails cultural demolition
we destroy when we create we destroy in
order
to create um
so the notion that you're going to
comprise a society
of separate little tiles forming a
mosaic
in which chinese people arrive
and cook and prepare chinese food and
they maybe raise their children going to
a chinese school
where they learn to speak chinese and
then grow up and work
in the same chinese restaurant
this is wrong in a sense that's
kind of profound and hard to perceive
okay if french cuisine really matters
if i'm going to just narrow it down a
bit
partly because my own experience in life
probably because my own expertise
probably because i'm vegan
let's be more specific in the french
theme french baking probably everyone in
this audience
knows if you go to paris the quality of
a croissant the quality of a loaf of
bread
is much higher than anywhere in canada
or the united states
i remember when i was in england i was
in cambridge england and you could get
french bread and croissants that were
imported from paris
you could pay and i remember the one of
the reasons i noticed they had a sign up
at the bakery
saying look you know try to tell us two
days in advance because they they said
they're sent over by airplane
they were airlifting yeah so in england
england is adjacent
to to france they couldn't make bread
and croissant they couldn't make
banquets as
well as the french okay now look hey
maybe it doesn't matter
maybe we're going to trivialize and
dismiss and say you know what bread who
cares
you know and i was asked this is why
before i was saying look reading chinese
being able to read understand chinese
politics or chinese philosophy or
chinese history
obviously it matters so obviously
there's people like me
who can engage in it from an outside
perspective with with bread
you know there's a debate to be had here
if it matters
to have bread and croissants baked
at the same high standards as the french
then you need people learning
how to do it in universities in canada
in universities in ireland
right you need the training facilities
to educate your own people
in the cuisine of the french you do not
need a multicultural society in which
you treat this
as a birthright that
makes no sense at all
now we don't ask this partly just
because it's trivial what is the future
of baking in canada what is the future
of
chinese cuisine in canada what is the
future of
indian food indian restaurants in canada
it cannot
be that you are perpetually
importing immigrants who devote their
lives
to reproducing their own culture within
yours right why don't we instead and
again i think this comes back to you
with my earlier video talk
the hierarchical and oppressive aspects
of multiculturalism
why wouldn't you go to india or go to
china and say hey you know what
i'm not looking for people who will work
for minimum wage
and if we're being honest a lot of what
goes on with multiculturalism and
immigration it's about paying people
less
than minimum wage oh you know what i'm
not looking for someone
who's willing to take a minimum wage job
at the back of a kitchen
making indian food or chinese food and
can you know what
i've come here to china or i've come
here to india
to recruit the most elite chefs
you've got i'm here to pay someone
more than 100 000 a year
to come to canada and run a training and
education program
so we can educate the next generation of
canadians to do
world-class indian food world-class
chinese food so that we can make
chinese food just as well as the chinese
of course that's what ireland should do
of course that's what can't
do of course it's the right thing to do
it's the right thing to do in every way
including morally right
and of course that's what's starting to
happen with french cuisine
french cuisine only because we don't
have the option
of recruiting french people to work for
minimum wage in the back of the kitchen
anymore they won't do it
it's just hard to do it's hard to get
the french to leave behind
the level of pay the level of benefits
the quality of life they have in france
to take up the sort of minimum wage back
of the you know
back of the restaurant jobs that we
presume we can get infinite numbers of
people to do from the philippines
from china from india right
isn't it different to have people who
are the leaders
in your society representing those other
cultures and teaching
whatever is really valuable about those
cultures
to your own that that would be real
multiculturalism
to say hey you know what in canada we're
not proud that we have
immigrants working for minimum wage
making chinese food
what we're proud of is that we have a
bunch of people who are experts
in chinese cuisine and we pay them more
than a hundred thousand dollars a year
to teach us
how to cook chinese food and now we can
do it also now we have
actually gained something from their
culture
now chinese language is obvious nobody
can even debate
whether or not it's worthwhile to import
people who are experts to teach chinese
language
we've got to do it we're way better it's
an emergency right
what else what else is culture it gets
debatable
quick chinese opera
does it matter or not if you think
chinese opera matters it's the same
thing
we've got to import some people who are
the best of the best to teach us
how to sing chinese opera to teach us
how to perform chinese opera and then
chinese opera
will become part of canadian culture it
will become part of irish culture
it will be something we appropriate and
that we do for them ourselves
in the same way that american rock and
roll music
has been appropriated by the chinese the
japanese the koreans
they do it themselves they don't just
import people
at minimum wage to play american music
for them they've mastered the art
they've made it their own and they've of
course produced
new genres of music that partly reflect
the american tradition that rock and
roll music is based on or blues music or
rap music by the way black american rap
music has been appropriated by the
japanese the chinese even the
cambodians everyone they've got their
own rap music now and it partly reflects
something unique
something original you've made in the
process of cultural production
this could happen with chinese cuisine
this could happen with chinese opera
this can happen with chinese language
we can start producing our own
literature and our own politics
that reflects what we've taken from
those traditions we can start producing
new philosophies
that reflect the mastery of the old
ultimately the critique of the old
ultimately
the demolition of the old okay that
in brief is my vision of
the future it can only be achieved
by the negation of everything we have
come to presuppose
as sacred but in fact is bad
and evil and wrong what we call
culture is tyranny
the model of a 21st century society
built on multiculturalism
is counterproductive and in the lives of
individual people
as well as when scaled up to look at us
in our masses in the millions
the outcomes are in a word tragic